Output
"1: Giraudeau, Mathieu; Heidinger, Britt; Bonneaud, Camille; Sepp, Tuul: Telomere shortening as a mechanism of long-term cost of infectious diseases in natural animal populations: 10.1098/rsbl.2019.0190
Abstract:Pathogens are potent selective forces that can reduce the fitness of their hosts. While studies of the short-term energetic costs of infections are accumulating, the long-term costs have only just started to be investigated. Such delayed costs may, at least in part, be mediated by telomere erosion. This hypothesis is supported by experimental investigations conducted on laboratory animals which show that infection accelerates telomere erosion in immune cells. However, the generalizability of such findings to natural animal populations and to humans remains debatable. First, laboratory animals typically display long telomeres relative to their wild counterparts. Second, unlike humans and most wild animals, laboratory small-bodied mammals are capable of telomerase-based telomere maintenance throughout life. Third, the effect of infections on telomere shortening and ageing has only been studied using single pathogen infections, yet hosts are often simultaneously confronted with a range of pathogens in the wild. Thus, the cost of an infection in terms of telomere-shortening-related ageing in natural animal populations is likely to be strongly underestimated. Here, we discuss how investigations into the links between infection, immune response and tissue ageing are now required to improve our understanding of the long-term impact of disease."
"2: Gaillard, Jean-Michel; Lemaitre, Jean-Francois: An aging phenotype in the wild: 10.1126/science.aay9493
Abstract:NA"
"7: Corripio-Miyar, Yolanda; Hayward, Adam; Lemon, Hannah; Sweeny, Amy R.; Bal, Xavier; Kenyon, Fiona; Pilkington, Jill G.; Pemberton, Josephine M.; Nussey, Daniel H.; McNeilly, Tom N.: Functionally distinct T-helper cell phenotypes predict resistance to different types of parasites in a wild mammal: 10.1038/s41598-022-07149-9
Abstract:The adaptive immune system is critical to an effective response to infection in vertebrates, with T-helper (Th) cells pivotal in orchestrating these responses. In natural populations where co-infections are the norm, different Th responses are likely to play an important role in maintaining host health and fitness, a relationship which remains poorly understood in wild animals. In this study, we characterised variation in functionally distinct Th responses in a wild population of Soay sheep by enumerating cells expressing Th-subset specific transcription factors and quantifying Th-associated cytokines. We tested the prediction that raised Th1 and Th2 responses should predict reduced apicomplexan and helminth parasite burdens, respectively. All measures of Th-associated cytokine production increased with age, while Th17- and regulatory Th-associated cytokine production increased more rapidly with age in males than females. Independent of age, sex, and each other, IL-4 and Gata3 negatively predicted gastro-intestinal nematode faecal egg count, while IFN-gamma negatively predicted coccidian faecal oocyst count. Our results provide important support from outside the laboratory that Th1 and Th2 responses predict resistance to different kinds of parasites, and illustrate how harnessing specific reagents and tools from laboratory immunology will illuminate our understanding of host-parasite interactions in the wild."
"10: Guiden, Peter W.; Orrock, John L.: Invasive shrubs modify rodent activity timing, revealing a consistent behavioral rule governing diel activity: 10.1093/beheco/arz050
Abstract:Animals adjust the timing of their activity to maximize benefits, such as access to resources, and minimize costs, such as exposure to predators. Despite many examples of invasive plants changing animal behavior, the potential for invasive plants to alter the timing of animal activity remains unexplored. In eastern North America, invasive shrubs might have particularly strong effects on animal activity timing during spring and fall, when many invasive shrubs retain their leaves long after native species' leaves senesce. We experimentally removed an invasive shrub (buckthorn, Rhamnus cathartica) and monitored the activity timing of a ubiquitous small-mammal species (white-footed mouse, Peromyscus leucopus) in spring, summer, and fall. We captured nearly 3 times as many P. leucopus in plots invaded by R. cathartica compared with plots with R. cathartica removed, and P. leucopus were captured 2 h earlier in invaded plots. Regardless of invasion treatment, P. leucopus appear to follow a common rule to set activity timing: P. leucopus were only active below a threshold of ground-level moonlight illuminance (0.038 lux). Diel and monthly lunar cycles play an important role in regulating small-mammal activity, but our data suggest that decreased light penetration dampens the influence of moonlight illuminance in habitats invaded by R. cathartica, allowing P. leucopus to remain active throughout the night. By changing the temporal niche of ubiquitous native animals, invasive shrubs may have unappreciated effects on many ecological interactions, including processes that alter community diversity and affect human health."
"15: Andrade, Michaella P.; Santos, Charles Morphy D.; De Paiva, Mizziara M. M.; Medeiros, Sylvia L. S.; O'Brien, C. E.; Lima, Francoise D.; Machado, Janaina F.; Leite, Tatiana S.: Assessing Negative Welfare Measures for Wild Invertebrates: The Case for Octopuses: 10.3390/ani13193021
Abstract:Simple Summary Wild octopuses face constant challenges to their survival, such as sublethal predation and conflicts with conspecifics, and can also be affected by human activity (e.g., interactions with divers or with fishing gear) and natural disturbances (e.g., storms, heat waves). These events can impact octopus welfare, especially when they induce stress, facilitate disease transmission, or result in starvation. Understanding the natural behavior of octopuses in the wild can help determine parameters that can be used to assess octopuses' health and welfare. Here, we use photographic and video records of wild octopuses in a variety of negative contexts, with the goal of identifying any potential metrics of welfare. We compare these observations with published data on octopus welfare in captivity and postulate potential consequences of decreased welfare for wild octopuses. Six measures of negative welfare identified for captive animals occurred in wild octopuses as well. We also identified two new measures of negative welfare unique to wild octopuses. This study identified the first set of criteria that can be used to non-invasively assess octopus welfare in the wild. We encourage further development of non-lethal and minimally invasive techniques to quantify welfare in wild invertebrates.Abstract Welfare metrics have been established for octopuses in the laboratory, but not for octopuses living in the wild. Wild octopuses are constantly exposed to potentially harmful situations, and the ability to assess the welfare status of wild octopuses could provide pertinent information about individuals' health and species' resilience to stressors. Here, we used underwater photos and videos to identify injuries and stress-related behaviors in wild Octopus insularis in a variety of contexts, including interacting with fishermen, interacting with other octopuses and fish, proximity to predators, in den, foraging, and in senescence. We adapted established metrics of octopus welfare from the laboratory to these wild octopuses. In addition to observing all of the stress measures, we also identified two previously unknown measures associated with decreased welfare: (1) a half white eye flash and (2) a half-and-half blotch body pattern. More than half of the individuals analyzed had arm loss, and almost half of the individuals had skin injuries. We also observed that irregular chromatophore expression and abnormal motor coordination were associated with interactions with fishermen. This is the first study to apply measures of welfare from the laboratory to wild octopuses. Our results may also aid in the identification of welfare measures for other wild invertebrates."
"20: Lyons, C. L.; Oliver, S. V.; Hunt, R. H.; Coetzee, M.: The Influence of Insecticide Resistance, Age, Sex, and Blood Feeding Frequency on Thermal Tolerance of Wild and Laboratory Phenotypes of Anopheles funestus (Diptera: Culicidae): 10.1093/jme/tjv196
Abstract:Resistance to insecticides is a global phenomenon and is increasing at an unprecedented rate. How resistant and susceptible strains of malaria vectors might differ in terms of life history and basic biology is often overlooked, despite the potential importance of such information in light of changing climates. Here, we investigated the upper thermal limits (ULT50) of wild and laboratory strains of Anopheles funestus Giles mosquitoes, including resistance status, sex, age, and blood feeding status as potential factors influencing ULT50. No significant differences in ULT50 were observed between strains displaying different resistance patterns, nor was there a significant difference between wild and laboratory strains. In some instances, strains showed a senescence response, displaying decreased ULT50 with an increase in age, and differences between males and females (females displaying higher ULT50 than males). Blood feeding did not seem to influence ULT50 in any way. For An. funestus, it seems evident that there is no cost to resistance despite what is displayed in other anopheline species. This could have significant impacts for vector control, with resistant populations of An. funestus performing just as well, if not better, than susceptible strains, especially under changing environmental conditions such as those expected to occur with climate change."
"23: ZITNIK, GD; BINGEL, SA; SUMI, SM; MARTIN, GM: SURVIVAL CURVES, REPRODUCTIVE LIFE-SPAN AND AGE-RELATED PATHOLOGY OF MUS-CAROLI: NA
Abstract:Although Mus caroli is being used in a number of laboratories as an experimental animal, basic information concerning its life span, reproductive ability, and age-related pathologies has been unavailable. Here we present this basic information, and discuss the similarities to and differences from the laboratory mouse, Mus musculus domesticus [strains A/StTrWo and (A/StTrWo x C57BL/6NNia)F1] and, from published data, wild-type Mus musculus."
"26: Dillon, Rod J.; Webster, Gordon; Weightman, Andrew J.; Charnley, A. Keith: Diversity of gut microbiota increases with aging and starvation in the desert locust: 10.1007/s10482-009-9389-5
Abstract:Here we report the effects of starvation and insect age on the diversity of gut microbiota of adult desert locusts, Schistocerca gregaria, using denaturing gradient gel electrophoretic (DGGE) analysis of bacterial 16S rRNA genes. Sequencing of excised DGGE bands revealed the presence of only one potentially novel uncultured member of the Gammaproteobacteria in the guts of fed, starved, young or old locusts. Most of the 16S rRNA gene sequences were closely related to known cultured bacterial species. DGGE profiles suggested that bacterial diversity increased with insect age and did not provide evidence for a characteristic locust gut bacterial community. Starved insects are often more prone to disease, probably because they compromise on immune defence. However, the increased diversity of Gammaproteobacteria in starved locusts shown here may improve defence against enteric threats because of the role of gut bacteria in colonization resistance."
"27: Badas, E. P.; Martinez, J.; de Aguilar Cachafeiro, J. Rivero; Miranda, F.; Figuerola, J.; Merino, S.: Ageing and reproduction: antioxidant supplementation alleviates telomere loss in wild birds: 10.1111/jeb.12615
Abstract:Reproduction is inherently costly. Environmental stressors, such as infection and limited food resources, can compromise investment at each breeding attempt. For example, recent data on captive birds showed that increased reproductive effort accelerates ageing. However, the effects of nutritional status and infection on ageing remain unknown. Telomeres function as protective caps at the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes, and changes in telomere length is a commonly used proxy for ageing. To partially address the mechanisms of ageing following reproduction, we supplemented, medicated or administered a combined treatment to wild blue tits (Cyanistes caeruleus) breeding in central Spain during 2012. The nutritional supplement consisted of two different antioxidants, whereas the medication was an antimalarial treatment against blood parasites. We evaluated the effect of these manipulations on reproductive success and parasite loads in the first breeding season, and on changes in telomere length between two consecutive breeding seasons. Supplemented birds showed no reduction in blood parasite infections in 2012, although they exhibited higher body mass and fledging success. The antimalarial drugs reduced infections by several parasite species, but this had no effect on fitness parameters. In the following season, telomeres from supplemented birds had shortened less. Altogether, we found that supplementation with antioxidants provided fitness benefits in the short term and reduced telomere loss a year following treatment. Our results provide indirect empirical support for accelerated telomere loss as a cost of reproduction."
"34: Ambati, J; Anand, A; Fernandez, S; Sakurai, E; Lynn, BC; Kuziel, WA; Rollins, BJ; Ambati, BK: An animal model of age-related macular degeneration in senescent Ccl-2-or Ccr-2-deficient mice: 10.1038/nm950
Abstract:The study and treatment of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a leading cause of blindness, has been hampered by a lack of animal models. Here we report that mice deficient either in monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (Ccl-2; also known as MCP-1) or its cognate C-C chemokine receptor-2 (Ccr-2) develop cardinal features of AMD, including accumulation of lipofuscin in and drusen beneath the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE), photoreceptor atrophy and choroidal neovascularization (CNV). Complement and IgG deposition in RPE and choroid accompanies senescence in this model, as in human AMD. RPE or choroidal endothelial production of Ccl-2 induced by complement C5a and IgG may mediate choroidal macrophage infiltration into aged wild-type choroids. Wild-type choroidal macrophages degrade C5 and IgG in eye sections of Ccl2(-/-) or Ccr2(-/-) mice. Impaired macrophage recruitment may allow accumulation of C5a and IgG, which induces vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production by RPE, possibly mediating development of CNV. These models implicate macrophage dysfunction in AMD pathogenesis and may be useful as a platform for validating therapies."
"39: Brown, Thomas J.; Spurgin, Lewis G.; Dugdale, Hannah L.; Komdeur, Jan; Burke, Terry; Richardson, David S.: Causes and consequences of telomere lengthening in a wild vertebrate population: 10.1111/mec.16059
Abstract:Telomeres have been advocated to be important markers of biological age in evolutionary and ecological studies. Telomeres usually shorten with age and shortening is frequently associated with environmental stressors and increased subsequent mortality. Telomere lengthening - an apparent increase in telomere length between repeated samples from the same individual - also occurs. However, the exact circumstances, and consequences, of telomere lengthening are poorly understood. Using longitudinal data from the Seychelles warbler (Acrocephalus sechellensis), we tested whether telomere lengthening - which occurs in adults of this species - is associated with specific stressors (reproductive effort, food availability, malarial infection and cooperative breeding) and predicts subsequent survival. In females, telomere shortening was observed under greater stress (i.e., low food availability, malaria infection), while telomere lengthening was observed in females experiencing lower stress (i.e., high food availability, assisted by helpers, without malaria). The telomere dynamics of males were not associated with the key stressors tested. These results indicate that, at least for females, telomere lengthening occurs in circumstances more conducive to self-maintenance. Importantly, both females and males with lengthened telomeres had improved subsequent survival relative to individuals that displayed unchanged, or shortened, telomeres - indicating that telomere lengthening is associated with individual fitness. These results demonstrate that telomere dynamics are bidirectionally responsive to the level of stress that an individual faces, but may poorly reflect the accumulation of stress over an individuals lifetime."
"44: Couch, Claire E.; Colvin, Michael E.; Chitwood, Rob L.; Peterson, James T.; Schreck, Carl B.: Scope of the cortisol stress response in Chinook salmon during maturation: 10.1016/j.fishres.2022.106416
Abstract:In semelparous Pacific salmon, increased cortisol levels accompany sexual maturation and may be related to the rapid senescence and death that occur after spawning. In fish with extremely high cortisol, pre-spawning mortality is more likely. This may be because elevated cortisol is accompanied by energy depletion and reduces the immune capacity of sexually maturing individuals, thus increasing their susceptibility to parasites and pathogens. Several studies have measured cortisol levels in Pacific salmon during the last few weeks prior to spawning, but there is a lack of information regarding longer-term changes in resting and stressed cortisol levels of migrating adult Pacific salmon. A better understanding of the scope of the cortisol response during sexual maturation could contribute to understanding the extremely high pre-spawning mortality experienced by some threatened populations of Pacific salmon. The objective of this study was to determine the scope of the cortisol stress response in spring Chinook salmon as well as the dynamics of resting cortisol during maturation. We conducted a laboratory experiment in which plasma cortisol in adult Chinook salmon was measured before and after application of a standardized stressor applied at monthly intervals during the last three months prior to spawning. We found that resting and stressed cortisol levels increased during the last three months prior to spawning. We also found that sexually maturing Chinook salmon are able to mount a cortisol response to acute stressors when resting levels are elevated during maturation. Additionally, the effects of stress and time on cortisol dynamics differed between males and females as well as between individuals, which has implications for population resilience to anthropogenic stressors in wild populations."
"49: Boulanger, CA; Smith, GH: Reducing mammary cancer risk through premature stem cell senescence: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204312
Abstract:The reproductive capacity of the mammary epithelial stem cell is reduced coincident with the number of symmetric divisions it must perform. In a study of FVB/ N mice with the transgene, WAP-TGF beta1, we discovered that mammary epithelial stem tells were prematurely aged due to ectopic expression of TGF-beta1. To test whether premature aging of mammary epithelial stem cells would have an impart on susceptibility or resistance to mammary cancer, female littermates from FVB/ N x WAP-TGF-beta1 mating were injected with mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) at 8-10 weeks of age. A total of 44 females were inoculated, maintained as breeders and observed for tumor development for up to 18 months. Only one mammary tumor appeared in 17 TGF-beta1 females while 15 were collected from 29 wild type sisters. Premalignant mammary epithelial cells in infected glands were identified by transplantation of single cell(1 x 10(5)) suspensions into nulliparous hosts and testing for hyperplastic outgrowth. Although the number of positive takes was significantly reduced with TGF-beta1 cells, both MMTV-infected TGF-beta1 and wild type cells produced hyperplastic outgrowths suggesting that premalignant transformation was achieved in each group. The results suggest a positive correlation between the procreative life-span of mammary epithelial stem cells and mammary cancer risk."
"53: Shim, Yhong-Hee; Paik, Young-Ki: Caenorhabditis elegans proteomics comes of age: 10.1002/pmic.200900542
Abstract:Caenorhabditis elegans, a free-living soil nematode, is an ideal model system for studying various physiological problems relevant to human diseases. Despite its short history, C. elegans proteomics is receiving great attention in multiple research areas, including the genome annotation, major signaling pathways (e.g. TGF-beta and insulin/IGF-1 signaling), verification of RNA interference-mediated gene targeting, aging, disease models, as well as peptidomic analysis of neuropeptides involved in behavior and locomotion. For example, a proteome-wide profiling of developmental and aging processes not only provides basic information necessary for constructing a molecular network, but also identifies important target proteins for chemical modulation. Although C. elegans has a simple body system and neural circuitry, it exhibits very complicated functions ranging from feeding to locomotion. Investigation of these functions through proteomic analysis of various C. elegans neuropeptides, some of which are not found in the predicted genome sequence, would open a new field of peptidomics. Given the importance of nematode infection in plants and mammalian pathogenesis pathways, proteomics could be applied to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying plant- or animal-nematode pathogenesis and to identify novel anti-nematodal drugs. Thus, C. elegans proteomics, in combination of other molecular, biological and genetic techniques, would provide a versatile new tool box for the systematic analysis of gene functions throughout the entire life cycle of this nematode."
"54: Gonzalez, Nicole Thompson; Otali, Emily; Machanda, Zarin; Muller, Martin N.; Wrangham, Richard; Thompson, Melissa Emery: Urinary markers of oxidative stress respond to infection and late-life in wild chimpanzees: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238066
Abstract:Oxidative stress (OS) plays a marked role in aging and results from a variety of stressors, making it a powerful measure of health and a way to examine costs associated with life history investments within and across species. However, few urinary OS markers have been examined under field conditions, particularly in primates, and their utility to non-invasively monitor the costs of acute stressors versus the long-term damage associated with aging is poorly understood. In this study, we examined variation in 5 urinary markers of oxidative damage and protection under 5 validation paradigms for 37 wild, chimpanzees living in the Kibale National Park, Uganda. We used 924 urine samples to examine responses to acute immune challenge (respiratory illness or severe wounding), as well as mixed-longitudinal and intra-individual variation with age. DNA damage (8-OHdG) correlated positively with all other markers of damage (F-isoprostanes, MDA-TBARS, and neopterin) but did not correlate with protection (total antioxidant capacity). Within individuals, all markers of damage responded to at least one if not both types of acute infection. While OS is expected to increase with age, this was not generally true in chimpanzees. However, significant changes in oxidative damage were detected within past-prime individuals and those close to death. Our results indicate that OS can be measured using field-collected urine and integrates short- and long-term aspects of health. They further suggest that more data are needed from long-lived, wild animals to illuminate if common age-related increases in inflammation and OS damage are typical or recently aberrant in humans."
"58: Pascual, S.; Gonzalez, A. F.; Guerra, A.: Coccidiosis during octopus senescence: Preparing for parasite outbreak: 10.1016/j.fishres.2010.05.013
Abstract:Heavy infection by Aggregata octopiana was commonly observed during histological examination of the digestive tract of wild and cultured post-spawned females of the common octopus Octopus vulgaris from Ria de Vigo (NW Spain). Observations on associated histopathology revealed large number of sporogonial stages with high invasive damage resulting in destruction of host tissue architecture and spreading of infective forms into the lumen of infected organs. The general picture of the parasite outbreak is discussed regarding the ecological trade-off of the parasite in senescent octopus. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved."
"62: Gauthier, D. T.; Latour, R. J.; Heisey, D. M.; Bonzek, C. F.; Gartland, J.; Burge, E. J.; Vogelbein, W. K.: Mycobacteriosis-associated mortality in wild striped bass (Morone saxatilis) from Chesapeake Bay, USA: 10.1890/07-2083.1
Abstract:The striped bass (Morone saxatilis) is an economically and ecologically important finfish species along the Atlantic seaboard of the United States. Recent stock assessments in Chesapeake Bay (USA) indicate that non-fishing mortality in striped bass has increased since 1999, concomitant with very high (>50%) prevalence of visceral and dermal disease caused by Mycobacterium spp. Current fishery assessment models do not differentiate between disease and other components of non-fishing mortality (e. g., senescence, predation); therefore, disease impact on the striped bass population has not been established. Specific measurement of mortality associated with mycobacteriosis in wild striped bass is complicated because the disease is chronic and mortality is cryptic. Epidemiological models have been developed to estimate disease-associated mortality from cross-sectional prevalence data and have recently been generalized to represent disease processes more realistically. Here, we used this generalized approach to demonstrate disease-associated mortality in striped bass from Chesapeake Bay. To our knowledge this is the first demonstration of cryptic mortality associated with a chronic infectious disease in a wild finfish. This finding has direct implications for management and stock assessment of striped bass, as it demonstrates population-level negative impacts of a chronic disease. Additionally, this research provides a framework by which disease-associated mortality may be specifically addressed within fisheries models for resource management."
"63: Pirisinu, Laura; Tran, Linh; Chiappini, Barbara; Vanni, Ilaria; Di Bari, Michele A.; Vaccari, Gabriele; Vikoren, Turid; Madslien, Knut Ivar; Vage, Jorn; Spraker, Terry; Mitchell, Gordon; Balachandran, Aru; Baron, Thierry; Casalone, Cristina; Rolandsen, Christer M.; Roed, Knut H.; Agrimi, Umberto; Nonno, Romolo; Benestad, Sylvie L.: Novel Type of Chronic Wasting Disease Detected in Moose (Alces alces), Norway: 10.3201/eid2412.180702
Abstract:Chronic wasting disease (CWD) persists in cervid populations of North America and in 2016 was detected for the first time in Europe in a wild reindeer in Norway. We report the detection of CWD in 3 moose (Alces alces) in Norway, identified through a large-scale surveillance program. The cases occurred in 13-14-year-old female moose, and we detected an abnormal form of prion protein (PrPsc) in the brain but not in lymphoid tissues. lmmunohistochemistry revealed that the moose shared the same neuropathologic phenotype, characterized by mostly intraneuronal deposition of PrPSc This pattern differed from that observed in reindeer and has not been previously reported in CWD-infected cervids. Moreover, Western blot revealed a PrPSc type distinguishable from previous CWD cases and from known ruminant prion diseases in Europe, with the possible exception of sheep CH1641. These findings suggest that these cases in moose represent a novel type of CWD."
"76: Higginson, AD; Gilbert, F: Paying for nectar with wingbeats: a new model of honeybee foraging: 10.1098/rspb.2004.2866
Abstract:Honeybees acquire wing damage as they age and older foraging honeybees accept lavender inflorescences with fewer flowers. These indicate the operation of some kind of optimal response, but this cannot be based on energy because energy expenditure does not change as the wings get damaged. However, wingbeat frequency increases with wing damage. A deterministic analytical model was constructed, based on the assumptions that bees have a limited total number of wingbeats that the flight motor can perform and that they maximize lifetime energy profit by conserving the number of wingbeats used in foraging. The optimal response to wing damage is to reduce the threshold number of flowers needed to accept an inflorescence. The predicted optimal gradient between wing damage (wingbeat frequency) and acceptance threshold (number of flowers on an inflorescence) was close to the observed gradient from field data. This model demonstrates that wear and tear is a significant factor in optimal foraging strategies."
"86: Lahnsteiner, Franz; Haunschmid, Reinhard; Mansour, Nabil: Immune deficiency causes annual late summer brown trout (Salmo trutta) mortality in Austrian prealpine river systems: 10.1007/s00027-009-0110-6
Abstract:For several years, severe brown trout (Salmo trutta) mortality has been observed in different prealpine river systems of Austria, Southern Germany, and Switzerland during late summer and early autumn. Often, the skin of the effected fish shows a medium to intense black pigmentation, and therefore this phenomenon is called Schwarze Bachforelle Phanomen or proliferative darkening syndrom. The present study was conducted to gain insight about its presence. From middle of May to end of August, brown trout and rainbow trout were kept in experimental tanks supplied with water from an effected river system. In brown trout, samples for blood diagnostics and histological investigations were taken after 0, 47, 62, and 77 days, and in rainbow trout after 0 and 107 days. Brown trout from a wild population were investigated for comparative purposes. Brown trout showed no abnormalities till the end of June. All fish sampled in the second half of July suffered from severe immune deficiency as the numbers of peripheral blood granulocytes and lymphocytes, plasma lysozyme activity, and plasma immunoglobulin levels significantly decreased. During August, the number of erythrocytes decreased and the osmotic fragility of the erythrocytes increased. Senescent erythrocytes became more frequent and the hematopoietic tissue of spleen and kidney enlarged. Also, the cellular composition of the spleen changed as the number of hemoblasts and normal erythroblasts decreased while the number of atypical erythroblasts increased. In the pronephros and hematopoietic tissue of the mesonephros, aggregation of macrophages and tissue disintegration was frequently observed. This was similar for brown trout from the field experiment and from the wild population. High mortality occurred in the end of July and during August. Death of the fishes might have been caused by secondary infections with microorganisms. Almost similar changes were observed in rainbow trout, however, the mortality was lower."
"95: Jurado, Olga Martin; Clauss, Marcus; Streich, W. Juergen; Hatt, Jean-Michel: Irregular tooth wear and longevity in captive wild ruminants: A pilot survey of necropsy reports: 10.1638/06-064.1
Abstract:Tooth wear is often suggested as an important factor limiting the life span of free-ranging wildlife. Given the frequent occurrence of poor dental health in captive animals reported in the literature, one would expect tooth health to be a limiting factor in captivity as well. Additionally, it could be assumed that brachydont (browsing) animals are more susceptible to dental health problems than are hypsodont (grazing) animals, given current indications for systematic increased tooth wear in some browsing species. A pilot survey of necropsy reports of adult captive wild ruminants (n = 294, 12 species) in one facility was performed in order to test these hypotheses and to calculate the incidence of irregular tooth wear. The overall incidence of irregular tooth wear was 20%, with a very high proportion of reports that did not mention the teeth at all. In contrast to this study's hypotheses, animals with irregular tooth wear were older than animals that died from other causes, indicating that reaching above-average age was a prerequisite for the development of reported abnormalities in this data set. A grazing species (blackbuck, Antilope cervicapra) was most affected, whereas two browsing species were not affected. Affected species had been regularly fed on sandy soil, whereas browsers had received feeds from racks, indicating that husbandry practices are most important for dental health. There was a high proportion of reported serous fat atrophy in animals with irregular tooth wear, indicating the clinical relevance of the problem. On average, adult individuals of the species investigated reached 41 % of the maximum reported life span. Although this number appears low, the lack of comparative data from other facilities does not allow for conclusions on the adequacy of the husbandry practices used."
"102: Lujan-Vega, Charlene; Keel, M. Kevin; Barker, Christopher M.; Hawkins, Michelle G.: Evaluation of Atherosclerotic Lesions and Risk Factors of Atherosclerosis in Raptors in Northern California: 10.1647/20-00078
Abstract:Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease that has been reported to affect the cardiovascular system of many avian species. However, atherosclerosis in raptor species has not been fully evaluated. The aim of this study was to histologically characterize central and peripheral atherosclerotic lesions in raptors that were submitted to a pathology service in Northern California from 1986 to 2013. We also evaluated risk factors, including age, gender, origin, and avian family. Atherosclerotic lesions were categorized as minimal, mild, moderate, or severe, based on the severity of the lesions and their distribution within the arterial wall. Among the central arteries, lesions were determined to be of greater severity in the aorta than in the pulmonary artery. More than 50% of the peripheral arteries were affected, including 53.1% (17/32) myocardial, 52% (13/25) coronary, 62.9% (22/35) arteries in the kidney, 52.2% (12/23) gonadal and 51.7% (15/29) splenic arteries; however, hepatic and pulmonary arteries were uncommonly affected. Atherosclerosis was diagnosed in 17 raptor species representing 4 families: Accipitridae, Cathartidae, Falconidae, and Strigidae. The overall prevalence (95% CI) of atherosclerosis in raptors was 2.3% (36/1574; range, 1.63%-3.19%) with the Falconidae having the highest prevalence at 7.4% (9/122; range 3.64%-13.93%) and with 0% detected in the Tytonidae and Pandionidae families. A multiple logistic regression model that jointly accounted for differences in risk by family, age, and gender found that the risk in Accipitridae was significantly less than that of Falconidae, that adult raptors were at greater risk of atherosclerotic lesions than juveniles were, and that females were more frequently affected than males were."
"103: Manzano, Carolina; Virla, Eduardo G.; Coll Araoz, Maria, V; Luft-Albarracin, Erica: Ovigeny strategy of the parasitic wasp Cosmocomoidea annulicornis (Hymenoptera: Mymaridae): effect of female age, feeding and host availability on reproductive traits: 10.1017/S0007485321000766
Abstract:The reproductive traits of the mymarid wasp Cosmocomoidea annulicornis (Ogloblin) (Hymenoptera: Mymaridae) attacking eggs of the sharpshooter Tapajosa rubromarginata (Signoret) (Hemiptera: Cicadellidae) were evaluated under laboratory conditions. Bioassays were carried out to estimate the realized fecundity and egg load of females. The ovigeny index was calculated and different biological traits, such as body size, oocyte length, gaster length and wing length, were analysed to assess significant associations between these traits and the species fitness. In addition, the effect of host availability and feeding on longevity and potential fecundity throughout life and the effect of female age on egg maturation dynamics were assessed. The results showed that C. annulicornis is a strongly synovigenic species. A positive correlation was found between fecundity and longevity of the females and between body size and oocyte length. Contrary to expected, body size was not related to fecundity and longevity. Females lived significantly longer in the presence of hosts and honey than when they were host-deprived and honey-fed or both host and honey deprived. Host availability had a significant effect on the amount of eggs laid by C. annulicornis females. Female age was negatively associated with oocyte length. Furthermore, females were able to mature additional eggs as they aged, nevertheless, when host-deprived, senescent females presented significantly less mature eggs than younger ones, suggesting a possible egg oosorption. These results might contribute to a better understanding of the reproductive potential of this species as a biocontrol agent."
"108: Maehara, Noritoshi; Kanzaki, Natsumi: Effect of aging in adult Monochamus alternatus (Coleoptera: Cerambycidae) on the susceptibility of the beetle to Beauveria bassiana (Ascomycota: Hypocreales): 10.1007/s10310-013-0423-0
Abstract:To clarify the effect of aging in adult Monochamus alternatus on the susceptibility of the beetle to Beauveria bassiana, we inoculated the fungus into adult beetles 0, 3, 7, 14, and 28 days after emergence. The number of days from B. bassiana inoculation to M. alternatus death increased with the number of days from beetle emergence to inoculation up to 14 days after emergence. This indicated that the susceptibility of adult beetles to the fungus decreased with aging. However, B. bassiana-inoculated beetles 28 days after emergence died earlier after inoculation than those inoculated with the fungus 14 days after emergence; i.e., the beetle's susceptibility to the fungus increased again. We considered this phenomenon to be the result of senescence of adult beetles. We concluded that the susceptibility of M. alternatus to B. bassiana decreased first and then increased again with aging."
"109: Hayward, A. D.; Pilkington, J. G.; Pemberton, J. M.; Kruuk, L. E. B.: Maternal effects and early-life performance are associated with parasite resistance across life in free-living Soay sheep: 10.1017/S0031182010000193
Abstract:Maternal effects occur when the maternal phenotype influences that of the offspring in addition to the effects of maternal genes, and may have a considerable influence on offspring parasite resistance. These effects, and the effects of early levels of reproduction and parasite resistance, may persist into later life and even influence ageing rates. Here we analyse a 20-year longitudinal data set collected on a free-living population of Soay sheep, to investigate the associations between a suite of maternal phenotypic traits and early-life performance on measures of parasite resistance across life. Our results show that maternal effects are important in determining offspring parasite resistance, since lambs born as twins and those born to the youngest and oldest mothers show higher parasite burdens. We show that the association between parasite resistance and natal litter size persists into adulthood. We also show that age-specific changes in parasite resistance in males arc associated with natal litter size, and that age-specific changes in females are influenced by early-life levels of reproduction and parasite infection. These results add to the growing evidence that conditions experienced by individuals during development can have a profound influence on immediate and late-life performance and may even influence ageing."
"112: Sparkman, Amanda Marie; Palacios, Maria Gabriela: A test of life-history theories of immune defence in two ecotypes of the garter snake, Thamnophis elegans: 10.1111/j.1365-2656.2009.01587.x
Abstract:1. Life-history theorists have long observed that fast growth and high reproduction tend to be associated with short life span, suggesting that greater investment in such traits may trade off with self-maintenance. The immune system plays an integral role in self-maintenance and has been proposed as a mediator of life-history trade-offs.2. Ecoimmunologists have predicted that fast-living organisms should rely more heavily on constitutive innate immunity than slow-living organisms, as constitutive innate defences are thought to be relatively inexpensive to develop and can provide a rapid, general response to pathogens.3. We present the first study to examine this hypothesis in an ectothermic vertebrate, by testing for differences in three aspects of constitutive innate immunity in replicate populations of two life-history ecotypes of the garter snake Thamnophis elegans, one fast-living and one slow-living.4. As predicted, free-ranging snakes from the fast-living ecotype had higher levels of all three measures of constitutive innate immunity than the slow-living ecotype. These differences in immunity were not explained by parasite loads measured. Furthermore, both ecotypes exhibited a positive relationship between innate immunity and body size/age, which we discuss in the context of ectotherm physiology and ecotype differences in developmental rates."
"118: Asghar, Muhammad; Palinauskas, Vaidas; Zaghdoudi-Allan, Nadege; Valkiunas, Gediminas; Mukhin, Andrey; Platonova, Elena; Farnert, Anna; Bensch, Staffan; Hasselquist, Dennis: Parallel telomere shortening in multiple body tissues owing to malaria infection: 10.1098/rspb.2016.1184
Abstract:Several studies have shown associations between shorter telomere length in blood and weakened immune function, susceptibility to infections, and increased risk of morbidity and mortality. Recently, we have shown that malaria accelerates telomere attrition in blood cells and shortens lifespan in birds. However, the impact of infections on telomere attrition in different body tissues within an individual is unknown. Here, we tested whether malarial infection leads to parallel telomere shortening in blood and tissue samples from different organs. We experimentally infected siskins (Spinus spinus) with the avian malaria parasite Plasmodium ashfordi, and used real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to measure telomere length in control and experimentally infected siskins. We found that experimentally infected birds showed faster telomere attrition in blood over the course of infection compared with control individuals (repeatedly measured over 105 days post-infection (DPI)). Shorter telomeres were also found in the tissue of all six major organs investigated (liver, lungs, spleen, heart, kidney, and brain) in infected birds compared with controls at 105 DPI. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study showing that an infectious disease results in synchronous telomere shortening in the blood and tissue cells of internal organs within individuals, implying that the infection induces systemic stress. Our results have far-reaching implications for understanding how the short-term effects of an infection can translate into long-term costs, such as organ dysfunction, degenerative diseases, and ageing."
"120: Hoang, A: Immune response to parasitism reduces resistance of Drosophila melanogaster to desiccation and starvation: NA
Abstract:In natural populations, organisms experience simultaneously biotic (e.g., competitors and parasites) and abiotic (e.g., temperature and humidity) stresses. Thus, species must have the capacity to respond to combinations of stressors. How does interaction between biotic and abiotic stress affect organismal performance? To address this question, I studied stress resistance of adult Drosophila melanogaster that survived parasitic attack (as larvae) by the parasitoid Asobara tabida. To determine the impact of genotype on stress resistance, I measured survival under desiccation and starvation of flies within isofemale (genetic) lines. Survivors of parasitism had slightly reduced survivorship compared to unparasitized relatives when both were unstressed, and this difference was exacerbated by desiccation and starvation. These results indicate multiple stressors can compound each other's individual negative effects on fitness. Moreover, isofemale lines differed in their sensitivity to environmental stress and to parasitism. Consequently, genotypic differences in sensitivity to stress may reflect differences in investment priorities between traits that promote survival over other life-history characters."
"121: Sherratt, T. N.; Laird, R. A.; Hassall, C.; Lowe, C. D.; Harvey, I. F.; Watts, P. C.; Cordero-Rivera, A.; Thompson, D. J.: Empirical evidence of senescence in adult damselflies (Odonata: Zygoptera): 10.1111/j.1365-2656.2010.01719.x
Abstract:P>1. Age-dependent increases in mortality have been documented in a variety of species of insect under laboratory conditions. However, while strong statistical evidence has been presented for senescence in vertebrate populations in the wild, we know little about the rate and shape of senescence in wild populations of insects.2. Odonates (damselflies and dragonflies) provide excellent candidate species for evaluating demographic senescence as they are large enough to be marked individually and they are easily re-sighted without recapture. The prevailing opinion - based entirely on qualitative examination of the declines in log numbers alive with time since marking - is that odonates exhibit age-independent daily survivorship.3. Here, we examine mark-recapture data on the Azure Damselfly Coenagrion puella over two consecutive seasons. For the first time, we evaluate and compare the fit of quantitative models that not only account for weather-dependent daily variation in daily re-sighting rates, but also age-dependent variation in daily survivorship.4. Models with age-dependent declines in daily survivorship provide a more parsimonious explanation for the data than similar models without these age-dependent effects. In general, models in which mortality increases in an exponential (Gompertz) fashion explain the mark-recapture sequences more efficiently than a range of alternative models, including those in which mortality increases as a power function (Weibull) or reaches a plateau (logistic). These results are indicative of a general senescent decline in physiological functioning, which is particularly marked after 15 days as a mature adult.5. Weather (temperature, sun and precipitation) and initial mite load influenced the probability of daily re-sighting. Weather and mite load also influenced daily survivorship, but their effects differed between seasons.6. Overall, fitting models with age as an explicit covariate demonstrates that odonates do indeed senesce. This contradicts previously held assumptions that Odonata do not exhibit age-dependent survivorship in the wild."
"127: Nussey, Daniel H.; Pemberton, Josephine M.; Pilkington, Jill G.; Blount, Jonathan D.: Life history correlates of oxidative damage in a free-living mammal population: 10.1111/j.1365-2435.2009.01555.x
Abstract:P>Reactive oxygen species, produced as a by-product of normal metabolism, can cause intracellular damage and negatively impact on cell function. Such oxidative damage has been proposed as an evolutionarily important cost of growth and reproduction and as a mechanistic explanation for organismal senescence, although few tests of these ideas have occurred outside the laboratory.Here, we examined correlations between a measure of phospholipid oxidative damage in plasma samples and age, growth rates, parasite burden and investment in reproduction in a population of wild Soay sheep on St. Kilda, Scotland.We found that, amongst females of different ages, lambs had significantly elevated levels of oxidative damage compared to all other age classes and there was no evidence of increasing damage with age amongst adult sheep.Amongst lambs, levels of oxidative damage increased significantly with increasing growth rates over the first 4 months of life. Neither mean damage nor the effect of growth rate on damage differed between male and female lambs.Amongst adult female sheep, there was no evidence that body mass, current parasite burden or metrics of recent and past reproductive effort significantly predicted oxidative damage levels.This study is the first to examine age variation in an assay of oxidative damage and correlations between oxidative damage, growth and reproduction in a wild mammal. Our results suggest strong links between early conditions and oxidative damage in lambs, but also serve to highlight the limitations of cross-sectional data for studies examining associations between oxidative stress, ageing and life history in free-living populations."
"135: Von Hardenberg, Achaz; Bassano, Bruno; Festa-Bianchet, Marco; Luikart, Gordon; Lanfranchi, Paolo; Coltman, David: Age-dependent genetic effects on a secondary sexual trait in male Alpine ibex, Capra ibex: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2006.03221.x
Abstract:Secondary sexual traits, such as horns in ungulates, may be good indicators of genetic quality because they are costly to develop. Genetic effects on such traits may be revealed by examining correlations between multilocus heterozygosity (MLH) and trait value. Correlations between MLH and fitness traits, termed heterozygosity-fitness correlations (HFC), may reflect inbreeding depression or associative overdominance of neutral microsatellite loci with loci directly affecting fitness traits. We investigated HFCs for horn growth, body mass and faecal counts of nematode eggs in wild Alpine ibex (Capra ibex). We also tested if individual inbreeding coefficients (f') estimated from microsatellite data were more strongly correlated with fitness traits than MLH. MLH was more strongly associated with trait variation than f'. We found HFC for horn growth but not for body mass or faecal counts of nematode eggs. The effect of MLH on horn growth was age-specific. The slope of the correlation between MLH and yearly horn growth changed from negative to positive as males aged, in accordance with the mutation accumulation theory of the evolution of senescence. Our results suggest that the horns of ibex males are an honest signal of genetic quality."
"143: Garnier, Alexandre; Gaillard, Jean-Michel; Gauthier, Dominique; Besnard, Aurelien: What shapes fitness costs of reproduction in long-lived iteroparous species? A case study on the Alpine ibex: 10.1890/15-0014.1
Abstract:The fitness costs of reproduction can be masked by individual differences, and may only become apparent during adverse environmental conditions. Individual differences, however, are usually assessed by reproductive success, so how fitness costs are influenced by the interplay between the environmental context and overall individual differences requires further investigation. Here, we evaluated fitness costs of reproduction based on 15yr of monitoring of individual Alpine ibex (Capra ibex) during a period when the population was affected by a severe disease outbreak (pneumonia). We quantified fitness costs using a novel multi-event capture-mark-recapture (CMR) modeling approach that accounted for uncertainty in reproductive status to estimate the survival and reproductive success of female ibex while also accounting for overall individual heterogeneity using mixture models. Our results show that the ability of females to reproduce was highly heterogeneous. In particular, one group including 76% of females had a much higher probability of giving birth annually (between 0.66 and 0.77, depending on the previous reproductive status) than females of the second group (24% of females, between 0 and 0.05 probability of giving birth annually). Low reproductive costs in terms of future reproduction occurred and were independent of the pneumonia outbreak. There was no survival cost of reproduction either before or after the epizootic, but the cost was high during the epizootic. Our findings indicate that adverse environmental conditions, such as disease outbreaks, may lead to survival costs of reproduction in long-lived species and select against females that have a high reproductive effort. Thereby, the occurrence of adverse conditions increases the diversity of reproductive tactics within a population."
"152: Groffen, Jordy; Parmentier, Henk K.; Van de Ven, Willem A. C.; Van Weerd, Merlijn: Effects of Different Rearing Strategies and Ages on Levels of Natural Antibodies in Saliva of the Philippine Crocodile: 10.3724/SP.J.1245.2013.00022
Abstract:The endemic Philippine crocodile (Crocodylus mindorensis) is a relatively small, critically endangered freshwater crocodile. In a head start program, crocodile hatchlings are caught in the wild, reared in captivity, and released back into the wild after two years. The current study aimed to determine optimal rearing strategies of Philippine crocodile hatchlings, including identification of possible diseases during rearing, and studying the effect of ages on natural antibody (NAb) levels. Thirty Philippine crocodiles were divided into two groups, half were reared with a hiding board, and half without the hiding board. Both groups received three different kinds of diets: meat, shrimp, or a combination of both. Saliva samples of the crocodiles were taken three times over a period of three months to test for NAb levels. Saliva samples were also taken from older crocodiles and crocodiles from different locations. NAb titres were compared to sheep red blood cells. Each time saliva samples were taken, a health check was done. The results showed that crocodiles would prefer the hiding board, and neither housing nor diet could affect the level of NAb titres in saliva. A positive correlation was found between NAb titres and body size, weight and age. Wild hatchlings had higher NAb titres than the hatchlings born in captivity, but the difference diminished with ageing. Five different diseases were found."
"154: Simonet, Pierre; Gaget, Karen; Balmand, Severine; Lopes, Melanie Ribeiro; Parisot, Nicolas; Buhler, Kurt; Duport, Gabrielle; Vulsteke, Veerle; Febvay, Gerard; Heddi, Abdelaziz; Charles, Hubert; Callaerts, Patrick; Calevro, Federica: Bacteriocyte cell death in the pea aphid/Buchnera symbiotic system: 10.1073/pnas.1720237115
Abstract:Symbiotic associations play a pivotal role in multicellular life by facilitating acquisition of new traits and expanding the ecological capabilities of organisms. In insects that are obligatorily dependent on intracellular bacterial symbionts, novel host cells (bacteriocytes) or organs (bacteriomes) have evolved for harboring beneficial microbial partners. The processes regulating the cellular life cycle of these endosymbiont-bearing cells, such as the cell-death mechanisms controlling their fate and elimination in response to host physiology, are fundamental questions in the biology of symbiosis. Here we report the discovery of a cell-death process involved in the degeneration of bacteriocytes in the hemipteran insect Acyrthosiphon pisum. This process is activated progressively throughout aphid adulthood and exhibits morphological features distinct from known cell-death pathways. By combining electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, and molecular analyses, we demonstrated that the initial event of bacteriocyte cell death is the cytoplasmic accumulation of nonautophagic vacuoles, followed by a sequence of cellular stress responses including the formation of autophagosomes in intervacuolar spaces, activation of reactive oxygen species, and Buchnera endosymbiont degradation by the lysosomal system. We showed that this multistep cell-death process originates from the endoplasmic reticulum, an organelle exhibiting a unique reticular network organization spread throughout the entire cytoplasm and surrounding Buchnera aphidicola endosymbionts. Our findings provide insights into the cellular and molecular processes that coordinate eukaryotic host and endosymbiont homeostasis and death in a symbiotic system and shed light on previously unknown aspects of bacteriocyte biological functioning."
"155: Badowski, Michael; Shultz, Christopher L.; Eason, Yvette; Ahmad, Nafees; Harris, David T.: The influence of intrinsic and extrinsic factors on immune system aging: 10.1016/j.imbio.2014.02.008
Abstract:Sex and age-matched wild-type and TCR transgenic mice were infected with cytomegalovirus (CMV) at 6 months of age and followed for 12 additional months to examine aging of the immune system. It was found that viral infection of C57B1/6 mice resulted in accelerated aging of the immune system as shown by a loss of CD8+28(+) cells and an accumulation of KLRG1(+) T cells. CMV infection of OT-1 transgenic mice had no influence on immune aging of these mice which nonetheless demonstrated an accumulation of CD8(+)28(-) and KLRG1(+) T cells with time. CD4(+) T cells were unaffected in either strain of mice. Thus, immunological aging was found to be due to both cell-intrinsic and cell-extrinsic factors. Persistent viral infections may accelerate immunological aging but consideration must be given to individual variation in the aging process. (C) 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved."
"167: Whiting, James R.; Magalhaes, Isabel S.; Singkam, Abdul R.; Robertson, Shaun; D'Agostino, Daniele; Bradley, Janette E.; MacColl, Andrew D. C.: A genetics-based approach confirms immune associations with life history across multiple populations of an aquatic vertebrate (Gasterosteus aculeatus): 10.1111/mec.14772
Abstract:Understanding how wild immune variation covaries with other traits can reveal how costs and trade-offs shape immune evolution in the wild. Divergent life history strategies may increase or alleviate immune costs, helping shape immune variation in a consistent, testable way. Contrasting hypotheses suggest that shorter life histories may alleviate costs by offsetting them against increased mortality, or increase the effect of costs if immune responses are traded off against development or reproduction. We investigated the evolutionary relationship between life history and immune responses within an island radiation of three-spined stickleback, with discrete populations of varying life histories and parasitism. We sampled two short-lived, two long-lived and an anadromous population using qPCR to quantify current immune profile and RAD-seq data to study the distribution of immune variants within our assay genes and across the genome. Short-lived populations exhibited significantly increased expression of all assay genes, which was accompanied by a strong association with population-level variation in local alleles and divergence in a gene that may be involved in complement pathways. In addition, divergence around the eda gene in anadromous fish is likely associated with increased inflammation. A wider analysis of 15 populations across the island revealed that immune genes across the genome show evidence of having diverged alongside life history strategies. Parasitism and reproductive investment were also important sources of variation for expression, highlighting the caution required when assaying immune responses in the wild. These results provide strong, gene-based support for current hypotheses linking life history and immune variation across multiple populations of a vertebrate model."
"168: Sadoughi, Baptiste; Schneider, Dominik; Daniel, Rolf; Schuelke, Oliver; Ostner, Julia: Aging gut microbiota of wild macaques are equally diverse, less stable, but progressively personalized: 10.1186/s40168-022-01283-2
Abstract:Background: Pronounced heterogeneity of age trajectories has been identified as a hallmark of the gut microbiota in humans and has been explained by marked changes in lifestyle and health condition. Comparatively, age-related personalization of microbiota is understudied in natural systems limiting our comprehension of patterns observed in humans from ecological and evolutionary perspectives.Results: Here, we tested age-related changes in the diversity, stability, and composition of the gut bacterial community using 16S rRNA gene sequencing with dense repeated sampling over three seasons in a cross-sectional age sample of adult female Assamese macaques (Macaca assamensis) living in their natural forest habitat. Gut bacterial composition exhibited a personal signature which became less stable as individuals aged. This lack of stability was not explained by differences in microbiota diversity but rather linked to an increase in the relative abundance of rare bacterial taxa. The lack of age-related changes in core taxa or convergence with age to a common state of the community hampered predicting gut bacterial composition of aged individuals. On the contrary, we found increasing personalization of the gut bacterial composition with age, indicating that composition in older individuals was increasingly divergent from the rest of the population. Reduced direct transmission of bacteria resulting from decreasing social activity may contribute to, but not be sufficient to explain, increasing personalization with age.Conclusions: Together, our results challenge the assumption of a constant microbiota through adult life in a wild primate. Within the limits of this study, the fact that increasing personalization of the aging microbiota is not restricted to humans suggests the underlying process to be evolved instead of provoked only by modern lifestyle of and health care for the elderly."
"172: PETERSON, RO: INCREASED OSTEO-ARTHRITIS IN MOOSE FROM ISLE ROYALE: 10.7589/0090-3558-24.3.461
Abstract:NA"
"178: Peterson, Rolf O.; Vucetich, John A.; Fenton, Gus; Drummer, Thomas D.; Larsen, Clark Spencer: Ecology of arthritis: 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2010.01504.x
Abstract:Osteoarthritis (OA) is a widespread degenerative disease of skeletal joints and is often associated with senescence in vertebrates. OA commonly results from excessive or abnormal mechanical loading of weight-bearing joints ('wear-and-tear'), arising from heavy long-term use or specific injuries; yet, in the absence of injury, the aetiology of OA remains obscure. We show that poor nutritional conditions experienced by moose (Alces alces) early in life are linked to greater prevalence of OA during senescence as well as reduced life expectancy. Moreover, we also found a negative relationship between kill rate by wolves (Canis lupus) and prevalence of OA, suggesting a potential connection between senescence of prey and the population ecology of predator-prey systems. This association between OA and early malnutrition also provides a basis for explaining the observation in anthropology that OA became more prevalent in native Americans as their diet become poorer - the result of relying more on corn and agriculture and less on hunting and gathering."
"183: Robischon, Marcel: Do cytokinins function as two-way signals between plants and animals? Cytokinins may not only mediate defence reactions via secondary compounds, but may directly interfere with developmental signals in insects: 10.1002/bies.201400099
Abstract:Cytokinins are plant hormones that have, among many other functions, senescence-modulatory effects in plant tissue. This is evident not only from biochemical data, but is vividly illustrated in the green island phenotype in plant leaves caused by cytokinins released for example by leaf mining insects or microbial pathogens. It is beyond doubt that, in addition to their roles in plants, cytokinins also provoke physiological and developmental effects in animals. It is hypothesized that the recently much discussed modification of plant metabolism by insects and associated microbes via cytokinin signals has a counterpart in direct cytokinin signalling that interferes with the animals hormonal systems and impacts their population dynamics."
"199: Pu, Yu-Chen; Wang, Rui; Liu, Hui-Hui; Lu, Sheng-Ping; Tang, Fan-Xi; Hou, You-Ming: Immunosenescence along with direct physiological allocation trade-offs between life history and immunity in the red palm weevil Rhynchophorus ferrugineus: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104143
Abstract:Recent works have generally indicated that insects exhibit two immune response strategies: external and internal immune defense. However, the immune-related trade-offs and physiological regulatory mechanisms in red palm weevil, a major invasive pest, remain unclear. Based on postinfection survivorship experiments, we initially measured baseline constitutive external immunity (antibacterial activity of external secretions) and internal immunity (phenoloxidase and antibacterial activity of hemolymph) in uninfected individuals. Then, we challenged the individual immune system and examined subsequent investment in immune function. Our data showed that multiple factors (instar, age, sex, mating status, immune treatment) interacted to affect immune components and infection outcomes, but the magnitude and nature of the impact varied in each case. Although immune senescence is a common phenomenon in which immune function decreases with age, different components of the immune system changed differentially. Notably, mating activity may impose an immunity-related cost, with some evidence of sexual dimorphism and age-associated differences. Finally, parameters related to lifehistory traits usually decreased temporarily because of increased immunity, suggesting that the ultimate consequences of immune function fitness may be physiologically traded off with other fitness aspects, including growth, development, mating, reproduction, and longevity. These results reveal the complex factors that impact immunity as well as the physiological regulation of individual immunity, which may determine the evolution and outcome of immune senescence and trade-offs."
"205: Jehan, Charly; Sabarly, Camille; Rigaud, Thierry; Moret, Yannick: Age-specific fecundity under pathogenic threat in an insect: Terminal investment versus reproductive restraint: 10.1111/1365-2656.13604
Abstract:The terminal investment hypothesis predicts that as an organism's prospects for survival decrease, through age or when exposed to a pathogenic infection, it will invest more in reproduction, which should trade-off against somatic maintenance (including immunity) and therefore future survival. Attempts to test this hypothesis have produced mixed results, which, in addition, mainly rely on the assessment of changes in reproductive effort and often overlooking its impact on somatic defences and survival. Alternatively, animals may restrain current reproduction to sustain somatic protection, increasing the chance of surviving for additional reproductive opportunities. We tested both of these hypotheses in females of the yellow mealworm beetle, Tenebrio molitor, an iteroparous insect with reproductive tactics similar to that of long-lived organisms. To achieve this, we mimicked pathogenic bacterial infections early or late in the life of breeding females by injecting them with a suspension of inactivated Bacillus cereus, a known natural pathogen of T. molitor, and measured female age-specific fecundity, survival, body mass and immunity. Inconsistent with a terminal investment, females given either an early or late-life immune challenge did not exhibit reduced survival or enhance their reproductive output. Female fecundity declined with age and was reduced by the early but not the late immune challenge. Both early and late-life fecundity correlated positively with life expectancy. Finally, young and old females exhibited similar antibacterial immune responses, suggesting that they both restrained reproduction to sustain immunity. Our results clearly demonstrate that age-specific reproduction of T. molitor females under pathogenic threat is inconsistent with a terminal investment. In contrast, our results instead suggest that females used a reproductive restraint strategy to sustain immunity and therefore subsequent reproductive opportunities. However, as infections were mimicked only, the fitness benefit of this reproductive restraint could not be shown."
"230: Ruff, Christopher B.; Junno, Juho-Antti; Eckardt, Winnie; Gilardi, Kirsten; Mudakikwa, Antoine; McFarlin, Shannon C.: Skeletal ageing in Virunga mountain gorillas: 10.1098/rstb.2019.0606
Abstract:Bone loss and heightened fracture risk are common conditions associated with ageing in modern human populations and have been attributed to both hormonal and other metabolic and behavioural changes. To what extent these age-related trends am specific to modern humans or generally characteristic of natural populations of other taxa is not clear. In this study, we use computed tomography to examine age changes in long bone and vertebral structural properties of 34 wild-adult Virunga mountain gorillas (Gorilla heringei heringei) whose skeletons were recovered from natural accumulations. Chronological ages were known or estimated from sample-specific dental wear formulae and ranged between 11 and 43 years. Gorillas show some of the same characteristics of skeletal ageing as modern humans, including endosteal and some periosteal expansion. However, unlike in humans, there is no decline in cortical or trabecular bone density, or in combined geometric-density measures of strength, nor do females show accelerated bone loss later in life. We attribute these differences to the lack of an extended post-reproductive period in gorillas, which provides protection against bone resorption. Increases in age-related fractures (osteoporosis) in modern humans may be a combined effect of an extended lifespan and lower activity levels earlier in life.This article is part of the theme issue 'Evolution of the primate ageing process'."
"237: WONG, PL; ANDERSON, RC: DEVELOPMENT OF SYNCUARIA-SQUAMATA (LINSTOW, 1883) (NEMATODA, ACUARIOIDEA) IN OSTRACODS (OSTRACODA) AND DOUBLE-CRESTED CORMORANTS (PHALACROCORAX-AURITUS-AURITUS): 10.1139/z87-381
Abstract:NA"
"242: Blazek, Radim; Polacik, Matej; Kacer, Petr; Cellerino, Alessandro; Rezucha, Radomil; Methling, Caroline; Tomasek, Oldrich; Syslova, Kamila; Tozzini, Eva Terzibasi; Albrecht, Tomas; Vrtilek, Milan; Reichard, Martin: Repeated intraspecific divergence in life span and aging of African annual fishes along an aridity gradient: 10.1111/evo.13127
Abstract:Life span and aging are substantially modified by natural selection. Across species, higher extrinsic (environmentally related) mortality (and hence shorter life expectancy) selects for the evolution of more rapid aging. However, among populations within species, high extrinsic mortality can lead to extended life span and slower aging as a consequence of condition-dependent survival. Using within-species contrasts of eight natural populations of Nothobranchius fishes in common garden experiments, we demonstrate that populations originating from dry regions (with short life expectancy) had shorter intrinsic life spans and a greater increase in mortality with age, more pronounced cellular and physiological deterioration (oxidative damage, tumor load), and a faster decline in fertility than populations from wetter regions. This parallel intraspecific divergence in life span and aging was not associated with divergence in early life history (rapid growth, maturation) or pace-of-life syndrome (high metabolic rates, active behavior). Variability across four study species suggests that a combination of different aging and life-history traits conformed with or contradicted the predictions for each species. These findings demonstrate that variation in life span and functional decline among natural populations are linked, genetically underpinned, and can evolve relatively rapidly."
"275: Dronen, Norman O.; Al-Kassar, Nothiala R.; Ali, Atheer H.; Abdulhameed, Mohanad F.; Abdullah, Basim H.; Al-Mayah, Sabeeh H.: Intraspecific variation in adult Uvitellina iraquensis Dronen, Ali & Al-Amura, 2013 (Cyclocoelidae: Haematotrephinae) from two collection sites of white-tailed lapwing, Vanellus leucurus (Lichtenstein) (Charadriiformes: Charadriidae), in Iraq: 10.11646/zootaxa.4242.1.1
Abstract:A total of 19 white-tailed lapwing, Vanellus leucurus, were collected from Huwazah Marsh, north-eastern Basrah Province, Iraq from February to March and in October, 2011 (collection site #1) and 60 V. leucurus were collected from Al-Hammar Marshes, Thi-Qar Province, southern Iraq from July to November, 2012 (collection site #2), and examined for cyclocoelids. Nineteen Uvitellina iraquensis Dronen, Ali & Al-Amura, 2013 from site # 1 and 17 specimens from site # 2 were fixed with minimal compression for comparisons of morphological characteristics, measurements, morphometric percentages and morphometric ratios commonly used to distinguish species of cyclocoelids. An additional five adult specimens from site # 1 were fixed without compression for comparisons. Specimens from site # 1 (n=24) represented only fully-developed, non-senescing adults, while those from site # 2 (n=17) could be divided into fully-developed (non-senescing) adults (n=8); younger (smaller, less developed) adults (n=5) and senescing adults (n=4). The following characteristics were relatively consistent, and appeared to be valuable in identifying groups of similar species and distinguishing species in Uvitellina: the presence or absence of the oral sucker; the oral sucker/pharynx width ratio; the posterior extent of the cirrus sac relative to the intestinal bifurcation; the position of the genital pore relative to the pharynx; the position of the testes in the body; the length of the intertesticular space; the length of the posttesticular space; the lateral disposition of the uterine loops; the presence of a posteriorly-directed, tail-like extension off the posterior confluence of the vitelline fields; the posterior extent of the uterine loops relative to the gonads; and the size of fully-developed eggs. It may be beneficial to calculate the percentage that measurements represent relative to the body length to provide insight into the relationship of the size of a structure to increased size of the specimens (growth). Specimens fixed without compression appeared to be less uniform, less symmetrical, shorter, more distorted and the internal details were more difficult to see."
"287: Laughton, Alice M.; Fan, Maretta H.; Gerardo, Nicole M.: The Combined Effects of Bacterial Symbionts and Aging on Life History Traits in the Pea Aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum: 10.1128/AEM.02657-13
Abstract:While many endosymbionts have beneficial effects on hosts under specific ecological conditions, there can also be associated costs. In order to maximize their own fitness, hosts must facilitate symbiont persistence while preventing symbiont exploitation of resources, which may require tight regulation of symbiont populations. As a host ages, the ability to invest in such mechanisms may lessen or be traded off with demands of other life history traits, such as survival and reproduction. Using the pea aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum, we measured survival, lifetime fecundity, and immune cell counts (hemocytes, a measure of immune capacity) in the presence of facultative secondary symbionts. Additionally, we quantified the densities of the obligate primary bacterial symbiont, Buchnera aphidicola, and secondary symbionts across the host's lifetime. We found life history costs to harboring some secondary symbiont species. Secondary symbiont populations were found to increase with host age, while Buchnera populations exhibited a more complicated pattern. Immune cell counts peaked at the midreproductive stage before declining in the oldest aphids. The combined effects of immunosenescence and symbiont population growth may have important consequences for symbiont transmission and maintenance within a host population."
"295: Murray, Dennis L.; Cox, Eric W.; Ballard, Warren B.; Whitlaw, Heather A.; Lenarz, Mark S.; Custer, Thomas W.; Barnett, Terri; Fuller, Todd K.: Pathogens, nutritional deficiency, and climate influences on a declining moose population: NA
Abstract:Several potential proximate causes may be implicated in a recent (post-1984) decline in moose (Alces alces andersoni) numbers at their southern range periphery in northwest Minnesota, USA. These causes include deleterious effects of infectious pathogens, some of which are associated with white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), negative effects of climate change, increased food competition with deer or moose, legal or illegal hunting, and increased predation by gray wolves (Canis lupus) and black bears (Ursus americanus). Long-standing factors that may have contributed to the moose decline include those typically associated with marginal habitat such as nutritional deficiencies. We examined survival and productivity among radiocollared (n= 152) adult female and juvenile moose in northwest Minnesota during 1995-2000, and assessed cause of death and pathology through carcass necropsy of radiocollared and non-radiocollared animals.Aerial moose surveys suggested that hunting was an unlikely source of the numerical decline because the level of harvest was relatively low (i.e., approx. 15%/2 yr) and the population usually grew in years following a hunt. The majority of moose mortalities (up to 87% of radiocollared moose [n = 76] and up to 65% of non-radiocollared moose [n = 84]) were proximally related to pathology associated with parasites and infectious disease. Liver fluke (Fascioloides magna) infections apparently constituted the greatest single source of mortality and caused significant pathology in the liver, thoracic and peritoneal cavities, pericardial sac, and lungs. Mortality due to meningeal worm (Parelaphostrongylus tenuis) was less prevalent and was manifested through characteristic neurological disease. Several mortalities apparently were associated with unidentified infectious disease, probably acting in close association with malnutrition. Bone-marrow fat was lower for moose dying of natural causes than those dying of anthropogenic factors or accidents, implying that acute malnutrition contributed to moose mortality. Blood profiles from live-captured animals indicated that those dying in the subsequent 18 months were chronically malnourished.Relative to other populations, average annual survival rates for adult females (0.79 [0.74-0.84; 95% Cl]) and yearlings (0.64 [0.48-0.86]) were low, whereas those for calves (0.66 [0.53-081]) were high. Pregnancy (48%) and twinning (19%) rates were among the lowest reported for moose, with reproductive senescence among females being apparent as early as 8 years. Pregnancy status was related to indices of acute (i.e., bone-marrow fat) and chronic (i.e., blood condition indices) malnutrition. Opportunistic carcass recovery indicated that there likely were few prime-aged males (> 5 yr old) in the population.Analysis of protein content in moose browse and fecal samples indicated that food quality was probably adequate to support moose over winter, but the higher fecal protein among animals that died in the subsequent 18 months could be indicative of protein catabolism associated with malnutrition. Trace element analysis from moose livers revealed apparent deficiencies in copper and selenium, but there was limited evidence of direct association between trace element concentrations and moose disease, pathology, or mortality. Time-series analysis of regional moose counts (1961-2000) indicated that annual population growth rate was related negatively to mean summer temperature, with winter and summer temperatures increasing by an average of 6.8 and 2.1 C, respectively, during the 40-year period. This change may have increased moose thermoregulatory costs and disrupted their energy balance, and thereby reduced their fitness. Time-series analysis failed to show a relationship between annual population growth rate and moose or deer abundance, indicating that food limitation via resource competition was unlikely. Population viability analyses, using count data (1961-2000) and demographic data collected during this study, suggested that the northwest Minnesota moose population likely would not persist over the next 50 years. More broadly, we conclude that the southern distribution of moose may become restricted in areas where climate and habitat conditions are marginal, especially where deer are abundant and act as reservoir hosts for parasites."
"297: Paleolog, Jerzy; Kuszewska, Karolina; Woyciechowski, Michal; Strachecka, Aneta: Reproductive Potential Impacts Body Maintenance Parameters and Global DNA Methylation in Honeybee Workers (Apis mellifera L.): 10.3390/insects12111021
Abstract:Simple Summary: The queens and sterile workers arise from genetically identical eggs but as imagoes, they differ in their life span, DNA methylation, and their functions. In the absence of the queen, the larvae develop into rebels, i.e., workers with increased reproductive potential. We assumed that since rebels are similar to the queen in many anatomical and behavioral features, they live longer and have lower levels of global DNA methylation, even when infected, e.g., by Nosema spp. Rebels always lived longer in comparison in normal workers and unexpectedly extended longevity of normal workers when they were together, similarly as the presence of a queen did. Rebels became infected more easily but tolerated the infection better. They also had lower level of global DNA methylation than normal workers. These features expand possibilities of the use of honeybees as a model for studies on senescence, nosemosis, eusocial evolution, and epigenetics.The widely accepted hypothesis in life history evolution about the trade-off between fecundity and longevity is not confirmed by long-living and highly fecund queens in eusocial insects. The fact that the queens and facultatively sterile workers usually arise from genetically identical eggs but differ in DNA methylation makes them a good model for studies on senescence, eusocial evolution, and epigenetics. Therefore, honeybees seem to be especially useful here because of long living rebel-workers (RW) with high reproductive potential recently described. Longevity, ovariole number, nosema tolerance, and global DNA methylation have been assayed in normal workers (NW) versus RW in hives and cages. RW always lived longer than NW and unexpectedly extended longevity of NW when they were together, similarly as the presence of a queen did. RW lived longer despite the fact that they had higher Nosema spore load; surprisingly they became infected more easily but tolerated the infection better. Global DNA methylation increased with age, being lower in RW than in NW. Therefore, RW are queen-like considering global DNA methylation and the link between fecundity, longevity, and body maintenance. Presented features of RW expands possibilities of the use of honeybees as a model for studies on senescence, nosemosis, eusocial evolution, and epigenetics."
"309: Bichet, Coraline; Moiron, Maria; Matson, Kevin D.; Vedder, Oscar; Bouwhuis, Sandra: Immunosenescence in the wild? A longitudinal study in a long-lived seabird: 10.1111/1365-2656.13642
Abstract:1. Longitudinal studies of various vertebrate populations have demonstrated senescent declines in reproductive performance and survival probability to be almost ubiquitous. Longitudinal studies of potential underlying proximate mechanisms, however, are still scarce.2. Due to its critical function in the maintenance of health and viability, the immune system is among the potential (mediators of) proximate mechanisms that could underlie senescence.3. Here, we studied three innate immune parameters-haemagglutination titre, haemolysis titre and haptoglobin concentration-in a population of common terns (Sterna hirundo) known to undergo actuarial senescence. We repeatedly sampled birds of known sex and age across 11 years and used random regression models to (a) quantify how immune parameters vary among individuals and (b) describe within-individual age-specific changes in, and potential trade-offs between, immune parameters.4. Our models revealed no differences between males and females in haemagglutination titre and haptoglobin concentration, and very low among-individual variation in these parameters in general. Within individuals, haemagglutination titre increased with age, while haptoglobin concentration did not change. We found no indication for selective (dis)appearance in relation to haemagglutination titre or haptoglobin concentration, nor for the existence of a trade-off between them. Haemolysis was absent in the majority (76%) of samples.5. Common terns do not exhibit clear senescence in haemagglutination titre and haptoglobin concentration and show very little among-individual variation in these parameters in general. This may be explained by canalisation of the immune parameters or by the colonial breeding behaviour of our study species, but more longitudinal studies are needed to facilitate investigation of links between species' characteristics and immunosenescence in wild animals."
"353: Novoa, Beatriz; Pereiro, Patricia; Lopez-Munoz, Azucena; Varela, Monica; Forn-Cuni, Gabriel; Anchelin, Monique; Dios, Sonia; Romero, Alejandro; Martinez-Lopez, Alicia; Maria Medina-Gali, Regla; Collado, Manuel; Coll, Julio; Estepa, Amparo; Luisa Cayuela, Maria; Mulero, Victoriano; Figueras, Antonio: Rag1 immunodeficiency-induced early aging and senescence in zebrafish are dependent on chronic inflammation and oxidative stress: 10.1111/acel.13020
Abstract:In mammals, recombination activating gene 1 (RAG1) plays a crucial role in adaptive immunity, generating a vast range of immunoglobulins. Rag1(-/-) zebrafish (Danio rerio) are viable and reach adulthood without obvious signs of infectious disease in standard nonsterile conditions, suggesting that innate immunity could be enhanced to compensate for the lack of adaptive immunity. By using microarray analysis, we confirmed that the expression of immunity- and apoptosis-related genes was increased in the rag1(-/-) fish. This tool also allows us to notice alterations of the DNA repair and cell cycle mechanisms in rag1(-/-) zebrafish. Several senescence and aging markers were analyzed. In addition to the lower lifespan of rag1(-/-) zebrafish compared to their wild-type (wt) siblings, rag1(-/-) showed a higher incidence of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, a greater amount of phosphorylated histone H2AX, oxidative stress and decline of the antioxidant mechanisms, an upregulated expression and activity of senescence-related genes and senescence-associated beta-galactosidase, respectively, diminished telomere length, and abnormal self-renewal and repair capacities in the retina and liver. Metabolomic analysis also demonstrated clear differences between wt and rag1(-/-) fish, as was the deficiency of the antioxidant metabolite l-acetylcarnitine (ALCAR) in rag1(-/-) fish. Therefore, Rag1 activity does not seem to be limited to V(D)J recombination but is also involved in senescence and aging. Furthermore, we confirmed the senolytic effect of ABT-263, a known senolytic compound and, for the first time, the potential in vivo senolytic activity of the antioxidant agent ALCAR, suggesting that this metabolite is essential to avoid premature aging."
"361: Han, Chang S.; Yang, Gawon: Reproductive aging and pace-of-life syndromes: more active females age faster: 10.1093/beheco/arab072
Abstract:A common pattern of reproductive aging is that reproductive performance increases during early life and reaches a peak, followed by a decline with age. Such quadratic reproductive aging patterns can differ among individuals. Moreover, if individual differences in reproductive aging patterns reflect individual-specific life-history trade-off strategies, they are also predicted to be associated with behavior according to the pace-of-life syndrome. For example, more active, aggressive, or bolder individuals may invest more in early reproduction, resulting in more rapid reproductive aging. In this study, we estimated individual differences in quadratic reproductive aging patterns and the relationship between reproductive aging and the activity of the virgin female bean bug (Riptortus pedestris) in the absence of mating costs. We found that the egg production of virgin females followed a parabolic trajectory with age and that individuals varied significantly in their quadratic reproductive aging patterns. In addition, we found that females that were relatively more active during early life invested in egg production more heavily at a young age and suffered from a sharper decline in egg production later in life. Thus, our results indicate that individual reproductive aging patterns may be a key component in the study of pace-of-life syndromes. We suggest that within-individual plastic characteristics of life-history traits such as reproductive aging patterns may explain the mixed results from multiple studies on pace-of-life syndromes."
"374: Denley, Danielle; Metaxas, Anna: Recovery capacity of the invasive colonial bryozoan Membranipora membranacea from damage: effects of temperature, location, and magnitude of damage: 10.1007/s00227-015-2707-8
Abstract:The survival and reproduction of individual or small groups of modules affords colonial organisms a great regenerative capacity. Consequently, modular loss due to fragmentation or senescence may not necessarily lead to colony mortality. This study (1) examines in situ partial mortality for colonies of the invasive bryozoan Membranipora membranacea in Nova Scotia by quantifying the location, magnitude, and timing of partial mortality for colonies growing on kelp (Saccharina latissima) in the field, and (2) estimates the effects of temperature (5-20 degrees C), and location and magnitude of modular loss on the recovery capacity of experimentally damaged colonies in the laboratory. In situ zooid mortality was substantial, with 50-100 % of colonies experiencing some level of partial mortality by the end of the growing season. Colonies with damage to older centrally located zooids maintained their capacity for growth and recovery, while colonies where younger peripheral zooids were removed showed no sign of recovery, and often experienced further loss of zooids. The effect of temperature depended on the location of colony damage, with increasing temperature resulting in increased loss of zooids for peripherally damaged colonies, but having no effect on the recovery of colonies with damage to central zooids. Variation in colony recovery may be related to the age distribution and reproductive maturity of zooids within a colony. Alteration of resource allocation between sexual and asexual reproduction may be adaptive in that it maximizes lifetime fitness in response to localized partial mortality."
"398: Lair, S; Beland, P; DeGuise, S; Martineau, D: Adrenal hyperplastic and degenerative changes in beluga whales: 10.7589/0090-3558-33.3.430
Abstract:Thirty stranded beluga whales (Delphinapterus leucas) from the St. Lawrence Estuary (Quebec, Canada) population and five animals from the Hudson Bay aboriginal hunt (Northwest Territories, Canada) were examined. Twenty one animals from the St. Lawrence Estuary had mild to severe adrenal lesions and four whales from the Hudson Bay population were affected by minimal adrenal changes. Cortical hyperplasia was observed in 24 adult beluga whales all from the St. Lawrence Estuary. Bilateral cortical cysts and cellular vacuolar degeneration were observed in the adrenal glands of 19 beluga whales from both populations. The cysts, filled with a cortisol-rich liquid, were present in both sexes. Beluga whales with adrenal cysts were significantly older than animals without cysts, and the severity of the lesions increased with age. Nodular hyperplasia of the medulla was observed in seven of the beluga whales, all from the St. Lawrence Estuary population. All lesions could be part of a normal aging process. The adrenocortical lesions might be due to stress or adrenocorticolytic xenobiotics, while the medullary hyperplasia might be caused by hypoxia or exposure to estrogenic xenobiotics."
"431: Flueck, Werner T.; Smith-Flueck, Jo Anne M.: Age-independent osteopathology in skeletons of a South American cervid, the Patagonian huemul (Hippocamelus bisulcus): 10.7589/0090-3558-44.3.636
Abstract:The huemul (Hippocamelus bisulcus), an endemic Patagonian deer, has been endangered for decads. Although conservation in Argentina has been directed at the 350-600 remaining huemul, the population has not recovered. In initial studies on the potential effects of diseases on huemul population dynamics, skeletal remains collected between 1993 and 2007 in the Andes (41-45 degrees S, 71.5-72 degrees W) were examined macroscopically for osteopathologic changes. Bones from six huemul were free of lesions, findings were inconclusive in 13 huemul with less than three bones, and osteopathologic processes were detected in 13 adults. Considering the limited remains/case, the prevalence of osteopathy (52%) among adults probably is conservative; 63% showed mandibular, 100% maxillary, and 78% appendicular lesions. Although predation represented the actual cause of death, the observed skeletal lesions would affect predator avoidance, possibly explaining the low average adult age (3.1 yr) and lack of population recovery. Compared with other studies in ungulates, huemul were affected at a younger age, and they had more severe pathologic changes. Due to the chronic nature of disease, low huemul population density, physiognomy, and spatiotemporal pattern of lesions, we discard senescence; gender; fulminating infections; congenital anomalies; metaholic, endocrine, genetic, or neurologic disorders; parasitism or marasmus; and fluorosis as primary etiologic factors. We hypothesize that generalized secondary chronic alveolar osteomyelitis and osteoarthritis in huemul is related to the nutritional ecology of these annuals. Selenium deficiency, which impairs bone metabolism and causes periodontitis ruminants, occurs in the region and it is more prevalent at high altitudes. Traditional winter grounds at low, elevations, sometimes far from high mountains, have been converted to livestock production, which has eliminated migratory behavior and keeps huemul in remote high-elevation refuges. Although this descriptive study contributes to huemul conservation, additional approaches are needed to investigate the etiology of this osteopathy and to close other gaps in knowledge on biology and ecology, of huemul."
"433: Armitage, Sophie A. O.; Boomsma, Jacobus J.: The effects of age and social interactions on innate immunity in a leaf-cutting ant: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2010.01.009
Abstract:Both developmental and environmental factors shape investment in costly immune defences. Social insect workers have different selection pressures on their innate immune system compared to non-social insects because workers do not reproduce and their longevity affects the fitness of relatives. Furthermore, hygienic behavioural defences found in social insects can result in increased survival after fungal infection, although it is not known if there is modulation in physiological immune defence associated with group living vs. solitary living.Here we investigated whether physiological immune defence is affected by both age and the short-term presence or absence of nestmates in the leaf-cutting ant Acromyrmex octospinosus. We predicted that older ants would show immune senescence and that group living may result in prophylactic differences in immune defence compared to solitarily kept ants. We kept old and young workers alone or in nestmate groups for 48 h and assayed a key innate immune system enzyme, expressing phenoloxidase (PO) and its stored precursor (proPO), a defence that acts immediately, i.e. it is constitutive. Short-term solitary living did not affect PO or proPO levels relative to group living controls and we found no evidence for immunosenescence in proPO. However, we found a significant increase in active PO in older workers, which is consistent with two non-mutually exclusive explanations: it could be an adaptive response or indicative of immunosenescence. Our results suggest that future studies of immunosenescence should consider both active immune effectors in the body, such as PO, and the stored potential to express immune defences, such as proPO. (C) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved."
"455: Cahn, Maya L.; Conner, Mary M.; Schmitz, Oswald J.; Stephenson, Thomas R.; Wehausen, John D.; Johnson, Heather E.: Disease, Population Viability, and Recovery of Endangered Sierra Nevada Bighorn Sheep: 10.1002/jwmg.232
Abstract:Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis sierrae) experienced a severe population decline after European settlement from which they have never recovered; this subspecies was listed as endangered under the United States Endangered Species Act (ESA) in 1999. Recovery of a listed species is accomplished via federally mandated recovery plans with specific population goals. Our main objective was to evaluate the potential impact of disease on the probability of meeting specific population size and persistence goals, as outlined in the Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep recovery plan. We also sought to heuristically evaluate the efficacy of management strategies aimed at reducing disease risk to or impact on modeled bighorn populations. To do this, we constructed a stochastic population projection model incorporating disease dynamics for 3 populations (Langley, Mono, Wheeler) based on data collected from 1980 to 2007. We modeled the dynamics of female bighorns in 4 age classes (lamb, yearling, adult, senescent) under 2 disease scenarios: 5% lower survival across the latter 3 age classes and persistent 65% lower lamb survival (i.e., mild) or 65% reduced survival across all age classes followed by persistent 65% lower lamb survival (i.e., severe). We simulated management strategies designed to mitigate disease risk: reducing the probability of a disease outbreak (to represent a strategy like domestic sheep grazing management) and reducing mortality rate (to represent a strategy that improved survival in the face of introduced disease). Results from our projection model indicated that management strategies need to be population specific. The population with the highest growth rate ((lambda) over cap; Langley; (lambda) over cap = 1.13) was more robust to the effects of disease. By contrast, the population with the lowest growth rate (Mono; (lambda) over cap = 1.00) would require management intervention beyond disease management alone, and the population with a moderate growth rate (Wheeler; (lambda) over cap = 1.07) would require management sufficient to prevent severe disease outbreaks. Because severe outbreaks increased adult mortality, disease can directly reduce the probability of meeting recovery plan goals. Although mild disease outbreaks had minimal direct effects on the populations, they reduced recruitment and the number of individuals available for translocation to other populations, which can indirectly reduce the probability of meeting overall, range-wide minimum population size goals. Based on simulation results, we recommend reducing the probability of outbreak by continuing efforts to manage high-risk (i.e., spatially close) allotments through restricted grazing regimes and stray management to ensure recovery for Wheeler and Mono. Managing bighorn and domestic sheep for geographic separation until Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep achieve recovery objectives would enhance the likelihood of population recovery. (C) 2011 The Wildlife Society."
